The general Bildung concept  The notion of a purpose of education (and life) that goes beyond the concrete content has roots back to antiquity. It has throughout history been carried by changing ideals that have reflected the fundamental values of the contemporary and societal structure (Dolin, ).  The contemporary Danish view of Bildung has its roots in German values from the first half of the th century and Ørsted gave one of the first formulations in Nyt Aftenblad in :  It is not so much the amount of knowledge that must be the goal of the higher teaching, but the stamp of reason put on this knowledge. (as quoted by Haue, ,  )  Such a formulation provides some understanding of the concept without defining it unambiguously - which has been the strength and weakness of the Bildung concept ever since. The discourse analysis calls it a fluid denominator, ie. a undetermined concept  and which different discourses struggle to fill in content.  Ørsted himself unfolds his stamp of reason in a threefold division: the true (reason in reason), the good (reason in the will) and the beautiful (reason in the imagination).  This can be somewhat roughly equated with knowledge, thoughts about knowledge and personalization of knowledge.  Almost the same threefold division can be found in Wolfgang Klafki , who is the theorist within Bildung who has had the greatest influence on the understanding of Bildung in the Danish education system and whose theory for Bildung was the basis for the High School Reform of  and the High School Reform of . Klafki brings together a number of hitherto educational notions of Bildung in two groups, namely material perceptions of Bildung, which emphasize content selection, and formal theories for Bildung, which emphasize the broad applicability and the procedural in the subjects. In contrast to these notions of Bildung, Klafki formulates the so-called categorical Bildung, which covers   the phenomenon by which we - in our own experience or in the understanding of other people - immediately comprehend the unity of an objective (material) and a subjective (formal ) moment. [] Bildung is categorical Bildung in the double sense that a reality categorically has opened up to a human being and this human being himself has been opened to this reality - due to insights, experience, experience of a categorical nature, such as this man himself has fulfilled. (Klafki ,  )  The categorical Bildung is thus a personality formation based on a professional knowledge, where the subjects insights are made into the learners own and thus help to shape the learners perception of the world.  In his later writings, Klafki concretizes the personal aspect and defines general Bildung as a duality of content (and reflections on content) and the relationship personally to the content:  general Bildung in this respect mean gaining a historically conveyed awareness of central issues of the time and - as far as is predictable - in the future, to gain the insight that everyone is co-responsible for such issues, and to gain a willingness to contribute to the solution of these problems. (Klafki ,  )  Klafki believes that general education is achieved by working with some so-called typical key problems, and he himself mentions five key problems: the question of peace, the environmental question, the inequality created by society, the technical management, communication and information media and human centered subjectivity (   ).  It is thus clear that knowledge is part of Bildung, perhaps even the basis of Bildung, but some knowledge is more important than others and knowledge alone is not enough. There must be a processing of knowledge and issues so that you can look beyond the concrete and be able to relate to it.  This classical Bildung concept is continuously developed and adapted to a society in rapid change.  In Bildung in a learning period, Søren Bengtsen () has a description of Klafkis Bildung concept that draws on concepts of a latent potential, of wisdom, insight and understanding, and of maturation. Bengtsen explains that the concept of Bildung has become relevant because Bildung functions as the cultures protection of its own already established and well-established norms and values” ( ). This formulation sees the high schools general project about Bildung as one that is about an insocialization in a culture and about acquiring legitimacy in relation to the circles of culture that employ these norms and values.  Based on the idea of socialization, the subject, by virtue of its role in culture - as a cultural institution - becomes formative in itself: knowing something about the subjects content, methods and biggest contributors is an ideal for Bildung.  Furthermore, the rationale for the subject being a cultural institution can be included as an ideal for Bildung: it is formed to know the subjects impact on cultural life and its role in societal development, but finally the educated individual can at any time defend and argue that the subject continues to occupy a prominent position,  in educational contexts. The educated individual knows why the subject is taught in high school.  This very subject-internal Bildung concept is where the high schools role was to preserve and sort. Bildung was something educated people recognized in each_other and employ to recognize each_other with. In contrast, Steen Nepper Larsen (,  ) writes in his book about Bildung : through." It is precisely in such a perspective that it becomes necessary to abandon an anti-socializing ideal for Bildung, in order to instead take seriously that learning is about creating oneself in a relation to what one learns.  Thus, a more simultaneous concept of general education, one that relates concretely to the science subjects, concrete situations in science teaching and a concrete science content, one that partly reaches out to and into the surrounding structures, but which also has an eye to Bildung is an individual affair, which is about creating oneself in a relationship to the disciplines, knowledge, norms and values:  Contemporaries call on people who of their own accord have the courage to employ their minds without the guidance of others, while they can endure to learn that they do not know or know everything; but that they can always learn something more, and that the world is not dangerous or indifferent, and that the social is not a straitjacket, but an opportunity for open and curious exchanges with other seekers. Bildung belongs to life, it is autonomous and may even be its own justification, just like art, joy and love. Bildung is renounced for being made stupid and unworthy. (Larsen ,  )  In this evaluation, we have emphasized that teachers and students themselves are allowed to describe and concretize what Bildung is to them. But we have also insisted that Bildung occurs in a relation to subjects, content and professional activities, and therefore can only be described by virtue of this relation. From the students perspective, the purpose of entering into this relationship is to employ the subject to acquire a personal authority; to renounce being made unworthy.   Scientific Bildung  The general concept of Bildung can rightly be said to consist of three dimensions across theorists and various representations:   a knowledge   a perspective   a personality dimension.   It is necessary to be knowledgeable in order to be educated, but knowledge in itself is not enough, one must also be able to put this knowledge into perspective. Both of these dimensions are usually part of a broad understanding of professionalism, in the understanding of being able to master the subject, to be competent within the subject. These two dimensions are also the dominant ones in scientific literacy, where they largely correspond to Roberts two visions. In addition, some formulation of scientific literacy also include personality forming elements and thus overlap with the northern European formulation of general education. With the inclusion of elements from scientific literacy, we formulate the following operationalization of natural science education consisting of three dimensions:   Knowledge (about nature and science; about the value and function of science; about concepts and methods, skills and competencies)   Perspective (internally and -External; to others or all of the subjects conditions; to and transcending the boundaries of the subject; historically and to the simultaneously socially relevant as well as the future demanding)   Personality (characterized by a willingness to seek out, relate to, and employ knowledge identity driving for overcoming and overcoming oneself, critically reflective, actively participating and behaving behaviorally)   Whether all three dimensions must be present in order to be said to be scientifically literate can of course be discussed, but only mastering the knowledge dimension can not reasonably be justified in possess general bildung.   In summary, it can be said that the scientifically educated human being:   has scientific knowledge - in a broad sense: both knowledge of the scientific content and proficiency in scientific methods.   Has a sense of the history of the natural sciences: One has an understanding that knowledge is not a static quantity, but that it is continuously developed and contributes to the social, cultural and technological development.   Is critical: You know the limitations and possibilities of the science subjects (areas of activity, areas of relevance) and you can therefore see the subjects in relation to other subject areas. One can draw on and argue for the employ of different professional knowledge in a given problem.   Have self understanding: You relate to what role you play in the world and how the world you are part of matters to who you are.   Is personal: You think of science as relevant and relevant, and you can give an idea of why a piece of scientific knowledge” is meaningful.   Develops as a human being: You employ science subjects to expand your horizons, to take a stand and form opinions, and ultimately to ensure that you can act with authority.  Seen in the light of Bildung, the natural science subjects must thus give the individual a reflection tool in relation to issues with a scientific content, which ensures both an academic and a society related and an identity developing perspective.  