Contemporary conceptualizations of Bildung Schneider () describes a contemporary formulation of Bildung as a reflexive event and its function to design and form the self, a complex meaning making process that occurs from childhood to advanced age. It can be understood as a lifelong challenge and opportunity (Biesta, a) and is suggested to be the process of developing critical consciousness and of character formation, self discovery, knowledge in the form of contemplation or insight, an engagement with questions of truth, value and meaning (Voesquez-Levy, , p , ).  In the works of Klafki ( ) the terms self determination, freedom, emancipation, autonomy, responsibility, reason, and independence are suggested to be crucial notions in relation to contemporary formulation of Bildung (Klafki, ). Similarly, Willbergh () claims that the idea of autonomy is essential for Bildung. However, the concept should not only be understood individualistically; it is also characterised by humanity and morality (Fischler, ). It is about the individual being embedded in the world (Loevlie & Standish, ) or as Nordenbo () writes: Bildung is about the individual in society ( ).  Bildung  in a contemporary meaning of the concept has both an educational dimension and a political; it is about both autonomy and responsible citizenship According to Nordenbo (), even for Von Humboldt, Bildung was never a private matter. He suggested that Bildung understands personal morality and politics as two sides of the same coin. Bildung consists of autonomous self formation and reflective and responsible action in, and in interaction with, society (see also  Fellenz, ). This tension between personal and societal values manifests itself also in other areas of research, such as,  Character and Citizenship Education (Sim & Ling Low, ; Staeheli & Hammett, ) and Environmental and Sustainability Education (Van Poeck & Vandenabeele, ). Due to its both educational and political dimensions, Bildung makes us think differently about education (Biesta, a). The concept can be used both in an apolitical sense, in the meaning of reflective distance from society, and as a political fighting word, in the meaning of agency (Horlacher, ). Biesta (a) characterises Bildung as a (neo)humanist tradition and argues (in contrast to many other Bildung scholars) that it differs from the Greek tradition of paideia. The latter is, he claims, connected to cultivation, socialisation and empowerment, whereas Bildung is connected also to the idea of emancipation, which adds an explicit political dimension to it (see further below). Probably, John Dewey (), in his famous book Democracy and education: an introduction to the philosophy of education from , used education with this meaning (Retter, ). Similarly, Nohl (,  ) writes: Education is not only concerned with learning facts, acquiring skills and becoming socialized in roles; education should also help us to challenge and subsequently change our yet unchallenged psychological and cultural assumptions that constitute our meaning perspectives”. Such changes of our meaning perspectives are the goal of what recently has been called transformative learning (Nohl, ; Sterling, ; Thomas, ). According to Bohlin (,  ), transformative learning theory, although only seldomly explicitly associated with the idea of Bildung, indicates ways to implement the ideal of moral Bildung in educational practice (see also Bohlin, ).  Five different versions of Bildung Gustavsson (, ) has  mainly from a Swedish perspective  identified three traditions related to Bildung, which are well-established today and all of them have developed over time. We call them (a) classical Bildung,  liberal education, and  critical hermeneutic  Bildung. In addition to these three versions Burman () identified two further civic-oriented Bildung related traditions:  the Scandinavian folk Bildung tradition, and  democratic education. Furthermore, other versions of Bildung have been or are still present (see  Horlacher, ), but in our view the five versions identified by Gustavsson and Burman illustrate the richness of Bildung cultures appropriately and is therefore be described in more detail below: (a) Classical Bildung is based on Von Humboldt (). Von Humboldt understood Bildung as a process of individualization where humans develop their personality through studies and reflections in a diverse, harmonious and unique way, and thus become a human original rather than a copy of others (Burman, ,  ; our translation). However, today Von Humboldt is often  at least in universities  more associated with the free search for knowledge, free from influences both from the state and the market. Von Humboldts emphases are also sometimes misused. His idea that Bildung manifests itself mainly in language led to a long_time of devaluing the natural sciences as being part of Bildung. This led to a long_time of over-emphasising the humanities to constitute classical Bildung against the science subjects.  Liberal education, which is an anglo american version of Bildung, can be tracked back to Von Humboldt (Loevlie & Standish, ), although the two traditions are largely independent today. According to Reichenbach (,  ), a core difference between German Bildung and liberal education is the crucial role of Romanticism in the German discourse on Bildung. Just like Bildung, liberal education is a rich and complex concept and its purpose can be described as the development of human beings who know how to employ their minds and know to think for themselves (Hadzigeorgiou, ). The character formation ideal is sometimes emphasised, sometimes instead a classical canon of topics (Burman, ). Humanism and generalisation are central  in contrast to specialisation  and also that education must be free from short-term instrumental thinking. In a report about liberal education for the twenty-first century one can read: the term liberal education is [] used [] as a description of the kinds of learning needed to sustain a free society and to enable the full development of human talent [ and it is] essential for success in a global economy and for informed citizenship (AACU, ,  ) The thought of lifelong learning, which for example is important in contemporary European policy debate, is related to this type of thinking. In America, during the last decades, there has been a tension between traditionalists (emphasising the traditional canon) and those emphasising more critical perspectives (Burman, ).  The Scandinavian folk Bildung tradition is a unique tradition from the late nineteenth century in Scandinavia. It might be translated as Bildung for the whole people and is a tradition that is less academically oriented than the classical German Bildung tradition. The German basic notion was combined with a pronounced benefit approach. Bildung should be useful for the creation of a society with justice. An important goal for many of its proponents was to empower members of the working class. In folk Bildung, the political dimension was much more explicit than in the classical German version, but it was not radical. Bildung as a relevant concept both on individual and societal levels. Children should be educated to be civic citizens. School should encourage students to become free, responsible citizens, with a developed individuality  cognitively, morally, as well as aesthetically (Burman, ).  Democratic education is the idea of a school for all, which was developed in the USA by mainly Dewey. In his book Democracy and education he argued that school has a crucial role to play in every democratic society. He suggested that the basic mission of school is to prepare for citizenship This requires that students can develop quite freely (Burman, ). According to Vkevoe (,  ), Deweys most important contribution to the Bildung tradition was his analysis of the social ethical underpinnings of a society that fosters democratic habits. Dewey used the term Bildung in his work, although not systematically (Bauer, ). Philosophically, democratic education is connected to pragmatism, and also to its successor progressivism (see further below). However, just like the concept of Bildung, pragmatism is a complex concept, which can be understood in several different ways (Kivel ., ). It is interesting that Kiveloe . (,  ) conclude that on a general level there is no significant difference between growth theoretical Bildung ideas and the ideas of pragmatists such as Dewey, James, and Mead.  Critical hermeneutic Bildung is based on the work by Hans-Georg Gadamer () and Paul Ricoeur () and can be described as Bildung as a journey (Gustavsson, , ). In interaction with the work of Gadamer and Ricoeur, Weniger () developed an formulation of Bildung connected to educational practice. It was further developed by Klafki based on critical theory and his approach is still important in education in the German speaking world and some parts of Scandinavia. Klafki used the term general bildung. Within this concept, part of the word, general, has two dimensions. The first dimension mean to achieve Bildung for all persons (like in the Swedish approach of folk bildung). The second dimension aims at Bildung in all human capacities ( Klafki, ). Klafkis thinking is based on the thought that responsible citizens in a democratic society need Bildung. Based on Klafkis educational philosophy, an educational metatheory for forming citizens of the world. According to him Bildung has a moral purpose, while education aims mainly at skills. He suggests that the world citizen should contribute the joint responsibility of the Earth and also should be able to overcome the contradiction between the individual and the state.  Critiques on the concept of Bildung and first ideas of a latemodern reformulation In educational policy, much that was done in the name of Bildung was more about socialisation than about emancipation and subjectification (Biesta, a). Reichenbach () describes how the use of the term underwent periods of trivialization, especially during the s and s, when the concept largely disappeared from the educational policy agenda, at least in some countries (Biesta, b; Liedman, ). The discourse of education underwent an empirical turn and focus shifted to psychology, sociology, and assessment, instead of discussing educational values, ethics and policies, although integrating Bildung with critical theory by Weniger and Klafki was an important exception (Biesta, b; Horlacher, ). Since the early s there has been a renewed interesting in Bildung in many countries, although the question of Bildung is quite often still approached in a rather instrumentalist manner in the policy debate (Biesta, b). Schaffar and Uljens () have identified the following two central points of criticism related to Bildung: (a) a logical conceptual type of critique, where Bildung has been called a container word and the meaning of emancipation has been questioned, and  a socio-cultural critique, where Bildung only is reachable for the elite and that it is thus solidifying the existing cultural power structures. During the last decades, Bildung has been also problematized from late- and postmodernist points of view. Masschelein and Ricken () went so far that they suggested abandoning the concept. In opposite, Biesta , among others, has claimed that Bildung still can work as a critical concept for education in a postmodern world (see further below). For him, the role of the individual in the process of Bildung, [] has to be understood as a reflexive process,  a process where the individual establishes both a relationship and a critical stance towards the existing culture and society (Biesta, a,  ). In this process of subjectification the individuals become autonomous subjects of action and responsibility (Biesta, b). This orientation tries to capture a conception of human subjectivity that is not selfish or self centered, but always understood as being in responsible relation with other human beings and, by extension, with the natural world more generally (Biesta, ,  ). Biesta  describes this as highly political and intervening in and reconfiguring of the existing order of things. Zembylas () discussed emancipation in science education based on Roy Bhaskars philosophy of meta-reality and claimed that it offers an interesting alternative to modernist and postmodernist accounts. Similarly, our position can be described as a reflexive (late) modernity (a term borrowed from Beck, ). Critical reflexive Bildung, which is described further below, is based on a theoretical stance that is inspired by philosophical, social and educational ideas such as emancipation and critical theory, but also postmodern problematization.