Competence goals such as "bottom-up" or "top-down"?  In the early s, the concept of competence was introduced as a goal category in several subject areas in Denmark. The subject of mathematics was described in  in terms of competence, based on the desire that children and young people should master the subject to a greater extent instead of simply being able to reproduce it. In addition, the concept of competence was found to be functional in describing an expected application of mathematics across and along the education system (Working Group behind the KOM project, ).  Research into and development of the mathematical competence concept inspired other subject groups to look for alternatives to a curriculum paradigmatic description of subjects at different stages in the education system,  in the Danish subject and the natural sciences. In , a status and vision description of the science subjects in Denmark was completed with several proposals for strategies for future science teaching, including that the subjects were targeted using the concept of competence. Scientific competence was defined as:  "Ability and willingness to act, alone and with others, who employ scientific wonder, knowledge, skills, strategies and meta-knowledge to create meaning and autonomy and exercise co-determination in the life contexts where relevant"  ( Dolin, Krogh & Troelsen, ,  ).  It is worth noting here concepts such as will, action, meaning, autonomy and co-determination, which all point in the direction of general education as the overall goal, and it also appeared from the publication that competence goals must be subject to educational goals. According to this formulation of the concept of competence, scientific competence should be included in peoples general education together with other professional competencies, including mathematical, linguistic and social sciences. And together they can form a foundation for  co-determination and self determination (autonomy) in a present and future society. In this way, the authors recognize the concept of general education as the overriding goal of all teaching, in line with Klafki () and Sjøberg (). (See also the web anthologys article on general education). This formulation of competence can therefore be called competence as a means_of formation.  Two concepts of competence  The explicit prioritization of education as the overriding goal of teaching and science competence as one of several means_of achieving general education can be perceived as markedly different in relation to the OECDs and the EUs prioritization of competence as the overarching educational goal category from the turn of the millennium. This formulation can be called competence as formation. That is, in the sense of "equal to". The prioritization has resulted in a European coordination of target categories for all levels of education in a joint project called the Qualifications Framework for Lifelong Learning. The efforts should be seen as an attempt to ensure the free movement of workers and the increased competitiveness of the participating countries, which are some of the EU and OECDs main objectives in coordinating education systems (Illeris, ). Subsequently, efforts have been made in Denmark to coordinate and plan educations with ministerially defined competence goals, where recently there are signs that a central team interprets and places narrow goal requirements in the subject descriptions,  in primary and lower secondary school (Højgaard, Bundsgaard, Sølberg & Elmose, ). this article is being written while ministerially appointed committees are working to formulate new goals for the subjects of the primary and lower secondary school, including the natural sciences. The committees have been given a restricted task, which is to formulate the goals of the natural sciences as competencies - and including two other categories, namely knowledge and skills. Incidentally, similar to the target categories of teacher education, which are also formulated in competencies, knowledge and skills. However, it is worth noting as a teacher student that the Ministry of Educations new Common Objectives operate with two different concepts of competence.  . Firstly, the general concept of competence that is common to all subjects in primary and lower secondary school (and thus also teacher education). Here, competence is defined as an ability-to reflect on ones knowledge and skills (Ministry of Education, ). That is, competence as formation.  . Second, a concept of scientific competence, as defined above by Dolin . (), and which must be perceived as characteristics that are specifically aimed at the science area, and which in addition to the students abilities also involve the students interest and experience of relevance. That is, competence as a means_of formation.  However, the problem with the introduction of the concept of scientific competence in the new simplified Common Objectives is that it lacks the clarifying definition that Dolin . proposed in  why the concept lack educational justification. It can therefore be difficult for the user of the new goals to see the relationship between the purpose of the subject and the concept of competence.  The general concept of OECD competence (no. ) is thus in the process of spreading to all parts of the Danish education system, so that all educations are targeted by a central (legislative) team, and so that the central authorities, including the state and municipalities , may monitor the achievement of the objectives of the same authorities. The approach to the concept of competence that is expressed here can be perceived as "top-down". This can be considered as contrary to a formation didactics, where the didactic interpretation and implementation of scientific competence goals can only be done decentrally in the teaching, as the competencies are developed in the meeting between the student, the teacher and the subjects (Illeris, ).  Competence goals can thus be used as a detailed control instrument, used by a central institution such as a ministry, but on the other hand, competence goals, subject to educational goals, can also serve as benchmarks for teachers and students in a teaching practice. The concept of scientific competence has a strength by focusing on the students application of scientific knowledge and skills as well as the students relationship to the relevance and value of the scientific content. So in this formulation of competence, the interpretation of the competence goals in the practice situation occurs - during planning, implementation and evaluation of the teaching. The formulation of the concept of competence is otherwise in line with international research in competence goals, which puts the student or employee at the center of their own competence development - competent is something you want to do something to become, not something others do by one (,  Mertens, ). This formulation and application of the concept of competence can be perceived as "bottom-up", ie that the competence is developed in the teaching context, which is determined by the didactic relationship between the student, the teacher and the subject - ie completely out of the pedagogical reality in the science room. Here it is the didactic rational thinking teacher (Dale, ) who uses the concept of competence as a planning and evaluation category. It is this last formulation of competency goals that this article is about.  The concept of science competence  The concept of science competence (no.  above) has been developed by a number of science didactics on the basis of a study of which core elements the science consists of. The authors (Dolin ., ) studied the individual subjects biology, geography, physics and chemistry in the education system and the common subject area that goes under the name science subjects  (compared with language subjects, history and society subjects, mathematics, practical-music subjects etc.) and came until the subject area has a number of characteristics. The subject area differs from others by virtue of the way in which one works - ie forms of practice, the way in which knowledge is created - epistemology, and on the content one examines - ie the subject field. There are no clear distinction between the characteristics of the subject areas. On the contrary, there are significant overlaps,  between mathematics and science, as these two subject areas to a certain extent employ the same way of creating knowledge via logical deductive form of argumentation. To a certain extent, this also applies to forms of practice, as both disciplines employ models and representations in their description and understanding of the subject field. But the subject field probably distinguishes the two subject areas the most, as the natural sciences always have nature and its phenomena as its subject field, whereas the subject field of mathematics is primarily the logical construction of axioms, the content of which can be purely abstract constructions - a so-called axiomatic system (Føllesdal, Walløe & Elster, ). The mathematics subject can choose to be inspired by nature, but is thus not bound by the fact that the mathematical knowledge must be measured in relation to its correspondence with nature. However, mathematics can choose to let its constructions assist science and the natural sciences in understanding nature.  Through the study of the science area as a whole and the individual science subjects, the didactics came to the conclusion in :  That what one must know and be able to do within the science subjects can be gathered in the concept of science competence, with which the science subjects contribute to the general education of the student.   That the concept of scientific competence can be subdivided into a number of sub-competencies, which together constitute the scientific competence.  The sub-competencies are to be understood as broad categories of will and ability, which include knowledge, skills and strategies that are appropriate in a scientific context. Below, the individual sub-competencies are described in the design that the science didactic research has described them. It must be remembered that the concept of scientific competence is recent, and therefore the sub-competencies are still being discussed and reformulated in order to find the most appropriate form and the most appropriate number. The effort is to find out the most important things you need to know in order to be scientifically competent. What are the core competencies of the sciences? The preliminary result of the efforts is seen below, but let us first imagine a few situations where scientific sub-competencies can be included, if they have been developed.  Example : You are asked to assess the characteristics of two areas of land in order to grow a particular crop What do you want to do?  If you are scientifically competent, you find the task meaningful and interesting. This premise is included in the will part of the definition. You want the task - you yourself are curious to find the answer to the task. Next, your assessment probably depend on a prior study and description of the two soil types, the surroundings of the areas as well as the crops need for optimal growth. Your investigations  include identification of relevant parameters, selection of specific methods for the parameters, execution and comparison between the soil areas. Next, you need to validate your results in relation to similar surveys, and finally, you need to communicate the results to the task provider.  Example : You are a teacher for an th grade in the sciences. The school has introduced a ban on energy drinks during school hours, and the students in the class are dissatisfied with that. How do you organize the teaching so that the students recognize the risks of consuming energy drinks?  If students are to develop scientific competence, they must first be motivated for the teaching and the scientific studies, which you can assume, as the students experience the ban as an unnecessary interference in their personal choices. Next, you agree on a procedure for examinations with the students - what should be examined, how and for what should the results be used? The studies can include content of active substances in energy drinks, effects on the body, possible side effects, etc. Results of studies and tests are disseminated through models and graphical representation, and finally the results are put into perspective through students discussion and problematization of choices for health promoting lifestyles. The class survey results and conclusions are communicated through the school newspaper and directly to the school management.  The above two examples include the application and development of the following sub-competencies:  Research competence - also called empirical  Modeling  Perspective  Communication   competence It is these sub-competencies that students are expected to develop through their schooling in primary school and youth education. formed sensible choices (Sjøberg, ).   