Locating the Concept of Competence in Relation to Other Concepts During the last decades, the conditions under which people live have changed rapidly. Advances in science and technology have influenced the way people live, and environmental problems have destroyed many peoples livelihood in many regions of the world. Globalisation mean events happening in places far away affecting peoples everyday lives worldwide. Thus, people are confronted with new opportunities but also with new challenges and problems. Therefore, living in todays complex world requires adaptation to new conditions as well as lifelong learning. Consequently, educational systems have to respond to these societal, economic and ecological changes by defining new educational goals that are reflected in the concept of competence. Competences are demand and function oriented. In order to solve complex problems, people should be able to realise certain competences in a particular context and to transfer these competences to other contexts. They thereby provide one foundation for lifelong learning. However, looking at the literature, the concept of competence is not unambiguously defined and some confusion exists with respect to related constructs like Bildung or literacy. The reason is that the construct of Bildung is understood as a more general formula for what is expected from (lifelong, not just school-based) learning processes [constituting] a precise description of the ability of subjects to act under the conditions of undecidability, indeterminacy, uncertainty and plurality (Klieme . ,  ). In comparison, competences have a stronger focus on what students should be able to do in order to, for example, compete in the labour market of a modern society: When scholars of educational science speak about the general goals of training within modern societies, they quarrel with finding a balance between [on the one hand] Bildung in the tradition of German philosophy,  developing personality and allowing individuals to participate in human culture, and [on the other hand] qualification,  establishing knowledge and skills that are relevant for vocational practice. (Klieme . ,  ) In addition, the concept of competence is also closely linked to the concept of literacy as it is operationalised in international large-scale studies like the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA). The PISA framework for scientific literacy emphasises the importance of the application of scientific knowledge and skills in the context of real-life situations. This application of knowledge and skills is influenced by students attitudes or dispositions towards science that can determine their level of interest, sustain their engagement, and may motivate them to take action (OECD ,  ). Similarly, the definition of mathematical literacy in PISA strongly emphasises the need to develop students capacity to formulate, employ and interpret mathematics in a variety of contexts (OECD ,  ) that reflect the range of situations in which individuals operate in the twenty-first century (OECD ,  ). Rychen and Salganik () even argue that the convergence between the concept of literacy as defined in current assessment frameworks and DeSeCos [the OECD project Definition and selection of competences] concept of competence, and the difficulties associated with the definition of the term literacy, together suggest that international assessments would benefit from replacing the concept of literacy with the concept of competence ( ). The Concept of Competence in Education In many countries, a shift from an input- towards an output orientation could be observed within educational systems (Waddington . ). Instead of relying solely on extensive content descriptions, educational standards define competences as learning goals for students at specific stages of their educational career ( National Research Council ; Qualifications and Curriculum Authority ; Schecker and Parchmann ). Despite this importance, however, the definition of the construct has to some extent remained fuzzy within educational research ( Bloemeke . ; Koeppen . ; Weinert ). In his review of theory grounded approaches to the concept of competence, Weinert () found that no broadly accepted definition or unifying theory existed. Instead, a tendency could be observed to use terms such as skill, qualification, competence, and literacy, either imprecisely or interchangeably, in order to describe what individuals must learn, know, or be able to do in school, at the workplace, or in social situations (Rychen and Salganik ,  ). In , the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) initiated the DeSeCo project with the aim of providing solid theoretical and conceptual foundations for the broad range of competences needed to face the challenges of the present and the future. They considered an explicit definition of the meaning and nature of competences crucial to enable a coherent discourse on competences from a lifelong learning perspective. In line with an earlier recommendation by Weinert (), the project decided on a demand oriented or function oriented approach to define competences: A competence is the ability-to successfully meet complex demands in a particular context through the mobilization of psychosocial prerequisites (including both cognitive and non-cognitive aspects) (Rychen and Salganik ,  ). In order to avoid reducing competences to mere ability-to expressions, the demand oriented approach requires the conceptualisation of competences as internal mental structures,  resources embedded in the individual such as cognitive skills, intellectual abilities ( critical thinking) and knowledge but also social and behavioural components such as motivation, emotion and values. Moreover, possessing a competence includes an action component. Individuals always operate in specific contexts that set the criteria for effective performance. It is thus not sufficient to possess the different resources but one must be able to mobilise and orchestrate them in a complex situation. This formulation of competence is consistent with the action competence model described by Weinert () that represents a holistic and dynamic perspective by combining complex demands, psychosocial prerequisites and contexts into a complex system that people need in order to solve problems. It is necessary to convert this very general definition into more domain specific definitions,  what does it mean to be competent in science, technology or mathematics? In educational contexts, the concept of competence usually refers to those context specific dispositions for achievement that can be acquired through learning, in contrast to basic cognitive abilities that can only be learned and trained to a far lesser degree (Klieme . ). Formulation competences as reflecting a persons potential to meet cognitive demands in specific areas of learning and behaviour makes them amenable to external interventions such as opportunities to learn and systematic training, thus increasing the utility of the concept for teaching and learning as well as for the empirical assessment of educational outcomes ( Klieme . ). Despite the huge amount of research in the last decade however, a recent review still considers competence to be a messy construct (Bloemeke . ,  ). From the authors perspective, the main reason for this is that the concept has been plagued by misleading dichotomies ( ). Interpretations of the definition of competence as complex ability constructs that are context specific [], and closely related to real life (Koeppen . ,  ) tend to focus either on the performance or the disposition aspect which leads to a dichotomy: is behaviour the focus of competence or is it the criterion against which dispositions are validated as measures of competence? Both approaches have their advantages and disadvantages. The first position describes a holistic perspective in which dispositions and performance are complexly linked and may change during the course of performance. In this formulation, it is of specific importance how precisely the different dispositions are linked and what influences their interaction. The second position takes a more analytical stance by dividing competence into multiple constituents. The major question is whether competence can be exhaustively decomposed into identifiable constituents. Sadler () argues that while decomposition reduces complexity and provides highly visible learning goals, it becomes more difficult to see the whole. Moreover, decomposition can lend itself to seriously deficient implementation. Teachers might become encouraged to deliberately coach students over the pass lines for specific competences  however, this does not necessarily translate into a coordinated ability-to complete a complex task with proficiency ( ). According to Bloemeke . () this dichotomised discussion neglects the processes that connect dispositions and performance. They argue for regarding competence as a process, a continuum from traits that underlie perception, interpret, and decision-making skills, which in turn give rise to observed behaviour in real-world situations ( ). Based on the prominence given to the concept of competence in international comparisons of educational outcomes and national standards, the assessment of competences has become a major focus in educational research. The valid assessment of competences is regarded as essential for the enhancement of educational processes and the development of educational systems. Assessments developed to measure competences have to meet specific requirements that differ from traditional knowledge tests. It has to be insured, for example, that the sampling of real-life situations is representative of the universe of tasks (Bloemeke . ). The dichotomy between holistic and analytical views of competence, however, is also reflected in the assessment of competences (Bloemeke . ). The analytic view of competence assessment focuses on measuring different latent traits (cognitive, conative, affective and motivational) with different instruments (Bloemeke . ). This requires the development of sophisticated models of the structure and levels of these constructs that precisely define them in specific domains. According to Klieme . (), the development of cognitive competence models faces two major challenges. The first challenge is related to the contextualised character of competences which mean that individual- and situation specific components have to be simultaneously considered. This leads to the distinction between two types of theoretical models to describe competences that are ideally complementary: models of competence levels, defining the specific situational demands that can be mastered by individuals with certain levels of competences, and models of competence structures  dealing with the relations between performances in different contexts and seeking to identify common underlying dimensions. The second challenge is related to the question of how competences develop Only few models have addressed this developmental aspect and their conceptualisations differ. Whereas some models regard competence development as a continuous progression from the lowest to the highest competence level, others conceptualise it as a noncontinuous process characterised by qualitative leaps. Related to the question of how competences develop is the question of to what extent such developmental models can represent cognitive processes (Leuders and Sodian ). Once theoretical competence models have been developed, they need to be linked to the results of empirical assessment by psychometric models. Here again the contextualised and complex nature of the competence construct defines certain requirements. The models need to incorporate all relevant characteristics of the individuals whose competences are to be evaluated while at the same_time they have to take domain specific situational demands into account. The holistic perspective on competence assessment focuses instead on assessing real-life performance without accounting for the contribution of specific dispositional resources ( Shavelson ). However, this approach also has specific challenges. Performance tasks are often time-consuming and introduce considerable amounts of measurement error due to their complexity. Nevertheless, recent examples show that the approach is not impossible ( Theyoeen . ). Especially in large-scale assessments, simulation-based test instruments have been shown to provide potential in this context (OECD ; Theyoeen . ). In their review, Bloemecke and colleagues () argue that moving the field forward is not a question of choice between the analytical or holistic approaches but rather of finding ways to productively combine them ( Grugeon-Allys . ), thus moving beyond dichotomies ( ). As stated above, in educational practice and research, competences usually relate to specific content areas (Koeppen . ), so-called domains. Typical domain specific competences in primary and secondary education include scientific competence, technological competence and mathematical competence. These domain specific competences are described in the next three sections. In addition, transversal competences often referred to as key competences become more and more important for the participation of individuals in society and in the workplace. This development is picked up in the fourth section on innovation competence. Competences in Science Education In science education many educational standards and curricula are based on the concept of competence or related to it. The educational standards in many countries define specific competences as learning outcomes at a certain educational level ( National Research Council ; Qualifications and Curriculum Authority ). However, the exact definition of these learning outcomes might differ from country to country ( Waddington . ). From the perspective of science education, competent students have to solve specific types of problems and have to deal with certain kinds of concrete situations relevant for science. More specifically, students have to detach science specific cognitive skills and knowledge from one situation and apply it to scientific problems in another situation,  a social setting (Kauertz ., ). A typical classroom situation where students are faced with scientific phenomena and problems that are explored or investigated through inquiry is described in the following box. Starting question given by the teacher: Usually when I am taking my effervescent Vitamin C drink I wait until it [has] stopped fizzing before I drink it. Some mornings I am running late for school. Can I speed up this reaction? Equipment students receive: Vitamin C effervescent tablets, boiling tubes, test tubes,  ml beakers,  ml measuring cylinders, stop watches, []. Problems students have to solve: . Which variable should be changed? . How to measure the effect of the change? A more general formulation of being competent in science was described by the OECD in the context of international large-scale studies in terms of scientific literacy. Within PISA, scientific literacy is defined as the ability-to engage with science related issues, and with the ideas of science, as a reflective citizen. A scientifically literate person is willing to engage in reasoned discourse about science and technology which requires the competencies to: . Explain phenomena scientifically [], () Evaluate and design scientific enquiry [], and () Interpret data and evidence scientifically (OECD ,  ). Students need to apply these competences in different situations reflecting personal, local, national and global contexts which in turn require them to draw on their scientific knowledge and apply it in the context of life situations (OECD ). Relating this back to science teaching and learning, effective learning strategies should include using a wide range of contexts, inductive rather than deductive processes, problem based learning contexts in which problems are integrated rather than broken into discrete, artificial elements, and encouragement of self directed learning and self reflection on learning styles (Rychen and Salganik ,  ). Although some disagreement with respect to the definition of scientific literacy has been found (Bybee ; DeBoer ; Roberts ), the different definitions show some common ground, namely, that scientific literacy usually implied a broad and functional understanding of science for general education purposes and not preparation for specific scientific and technical careers (DeBoer ,  ). In this sense, scientific literacy is closely related to science for all and can be seen as a precondition for participating in a society that is shaped by science and technology (DeBoer ). The objective of these two concepts is the constitution of a common core of learning in science for all young people, regardless of their social circumstances and career aspirations. But, what are these types of problems and concrete situations that students face in science education? To answer this question one has to look at teaching and learning situations as well as at assessment situations. For both types of situations, examples have been published. For an overview, it is worthwhile to have a look at the PISA framework that defines relevant contexts for its assessment items: health and disease, natural resources, environmental quality, hazards, and the frontiers of science and technology (OECD ,  ). These contexts can also serve as a frame for teaching and learning in school (Gilbert ). Science subjects like chemistry have to emphasise the relevance of the taught content and make this relevance explicit to the students (Bulte . ). It is assumed that this might help students understand the contribution of science to their future lives. The approach of contextualising teaching and learning has been picked up by several EU funded development and research projects like ASSIST-ME (assistme.ku.dk/practical-examples/swissexamples/), Establish (www.establish-feu), and mascil (www.mascil-project. eu). Within the ASSIST-ME project, the different partners were asked in a nonrepresentative survey to define the concept of competence from the perspective of their respective countries. From the answers it becomes obvious that in all countries competences are seen as something each individual possesses and that have to be applied to specific situations in order to solve problems. Prerequisites for being competent in a specific domain are cognitive constructs like knowledge and skills as well as affective constructs like interest or motivation. In the following, some key quotations from the survey are shown in order to reflect the formulation of competence in some of the countries:  The ability-to perform a task that requires knowledge and skills is an outcome of a competence. (Cyprus)  Competence is such a development of persons knowledge, skills, attitudes, values and self regulation in particular domain ( problem solving, modelling, argumentation, empirical investigation), that make the person able to cope with relevant challenges and demands, effectively solve the tasks, and creatively adjust oneself to domain relevant situations either in individual or the social perspective. (Czech Republic)  A person is scientifically competent when she/he has the ability and commitment to act, alone and with others, in a way that takes advantage of scientific curiosity, knowledge, skills, strategies and meta-knowledge to create meaning and autonomy and exert codetermination in relevant life contexts. (Denmark)  In the national standards [of Switzerland] a competence includes both a skill and a content . That is, a competence is determined by both a skill and a content. (Switzerland)  It can be defined as a combination of basic knowledge relevant to live in our society, capacities to involve them in diverse situations but also lifelong necessary attitudes as to be open to others, the appetite for search for truth, the respect of oneself and others, the curiosity and the creativity. (France) Competences in science education are manifold and often no concurrent or well-accepted definition of competences exists ( Roennebeck . ). Thats why the issue of measuring competences is still one of the driving questions of research and practice in science education ( Gitomer and Duschl ; Harlen ). There is an ongoing debate on the validity of standardised and teachers assessments ( Black ., ), the influence of assessment practices on daily teaching (Binkley . ; Cizek ) and the advantages and disadvantages of specific item formats ( Haladyna . ). In view of the assessment of scientific competences, especially validity is of  importance: does the test measure the competence,  planning an investigation that it aims to measure? Here it becomes obvious why a precise definition of the assessed construct is a prerequisite for each assessment. It is much easier to develop a test that is valid with regard to the competence of interest if a precise definition exists and if the behaviour students should show when planning an investigation is well defined.  